I'll be reading from Daniel, chapter four, beginning in verse four.
I, Nebuchadnezzar was at home in my palace, contented and prosperous.
I had a dream that made me afraid.
As I was lying in bed, the images and visions that passed through my mind terrified me.
So I commanded that all the wise men of Babylon be brought before me to interpret the dream for me.
When the magicians, enchanters, astrologers, and diviners came, I told them the dream, but they could not interpret it for me.
Finally, Daniel came into my presence and I told him the dream.
He is called Belteshazzar after the name of my God and the spirit of the holy gods is in him.
I said, Belteshazzar, chief of the magicians, I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in you and that no mystery is too difficult for you.
Here is my dream, interpret it for me.
Jump out to verse 22.
Your majesty, you are that tree.
You have become great and strong.
Your greatness has grown until it reaches the sky, and your dominion extends to distant parts of the earth.
Your majesty saw a holy one, a messenger, coming down from heaven and saying, cut down the tree and destroy it, but leave the stump bound with iron and bronze in the field
or in the grass of the field, while its roots remain in the ground.
Let him be drenched with the dew of heaven, let him live with the wild animals until seven times pass by for him.
This is the interpretation, Your Majesty, and this is the decree the Most High has issued against my Lord the King.
You will be driven away from people and will live with wild animals.
You will eat grass like the ox and be drenched with the dew of heaven.
seven times will pass by for you until you acknowledge that the most high sovereign over all kingdoms on earth and gives them to anyone he wishes.
The command to leave the stump of the tree with its roots means that your kingdom will be restored to you when you acknowledge that heaven rules.
Therefore your majesty be pleased to accept my advice.
Renounce your sins by doing what is right and your wickedness by being kind to the oppressed.
It may be
that then your prosperity will continue.
All this happened to King Nebuchadnezzar.
12 months later, as the king was walking on the roof of the royal palace of Babylon, he said, is not this the great Babylon I have built as the royal residence by my mighty power and for the glory of my majesty?
Even as the words were on his lips, a voice came from heaven.
This is what is decreed for you, King Nebuchadnezzar.
Your royal authority has been taken from you.
You will be driven away from people and will live with wild animals.
You will eat grass like the ox.
Seven times will pass by for you until you acknowledge that the most highest sovereign over all kingdoms on earth and gives them to anyone he wishes.
Immediately what had been said about Nebuchadnezzar was fulfilled.
He was driven away from the people and ate grass like the ox.
His body was drenched with the dew of heaven until his hair grew like the feathers of an eagle and his nails like the claws of a bird.
At the end of that time, I never can as a raise my eyes toward heaven and my sanity was restored.
Then I praised the most high.
I honored and glorified him who lives forever.
His dominion is an eternal dominion.
His kingdom endures from generation to generation.
This is the word of the Lord.
It's great to be back at Bridgetown, and I know this is a message on pride, so I shouldn't dwell too long on the introduction of me.
I'll be very self-absorbed, but the best way you could have introduced me in so far as I am concerned is as a friend, as a growing friend, and you said I think yesterday afternoon that you need a friend who isn't impressed by you, and I don't think I'm so impressed by you that I would not challenge you if you needed to be challenged, but I am impressed.
by your integrity, wisdom and love.
And I want you to know that as I'm biking around my city of Vancouver, BC, as opposed to Vancouver, Washington, I'm from Canada, I pray regularly for Tyler and your team, your amazing team of colleagues like Bethany and Gavin and Brian and others.
And I pray for you as well, especially since I was with you last year, whatever that was, I think at the end of April.
As I come to stop lights, come to traffic lights, I'll regularly pray the Lord's prayer and then we'll pray for Tyler and Bridgetown.
So thank you for letting me be part of your community through that prayer and this past weekend to be able to receive the gift of the Spirit through you.
It's been, yeah, it's been powerful for me as well.
At the time it was the largest ship that had
ever been built.
Newspapers described it as the ship of dreams, as a floating palace.
Someone connected with the building of the ship apparently said, not even God could sink this ship.
What am I referring to?
The Titanic, you know.
The Titanic was more than a ship.
It was
It was a statement, it was a declaration that human ingenuity had conquered the chaotic seas.
And on the night of April 15th, 1912, the Titanic received multiple warnings about icebergs, but ignored those warnings, continued to sail full speed ahead, did not alter course.
Now, if you were to ask someone, what sang the Titanic?
What would most people say?
An iceberg or icebergs.
But the case can be made that what really seemed the Titanic was pride and pride can sink us as well.
Here at Bridgetown, you've been in a series on the seven deadly sins.
And as Tyler pointed out in his introduction message, from the time of the fourth century, with the leadership of a person named Evagoras, these seven sins were considered especially deadly in part because they opened the door to other sins.
And one of the sins among the deadly seven,
that acts as a gateway to the other six sins is pride.
So pride leads to envy because pride assumes that we should have the best position.
And as Tyler pointed out in his powerful opening message in the series, pride causes us to have this envious mindset that makes us
feel like we need to measure ourself against someone else and then to compare and compete.
And then in the week following, Christine Kane gave a very dynamic sermon on how pride leads to the deadly sin of anger.
Pride says, my way or the highway, my way or get on to the I-5 out of Portland.
Go to Canada or something like that.
Pride then leads to the deadly sin of greed.
And as Tyler pointed out astutely this past Sunday, pride causes us to turn inward to become self-absorbed and to fail to look upward at the abundant provision of our God.
And as we're looking
down and inward, we become anxious about whether we'll have enough.
We take on a scarcity mentality and so we feel like we need more, more, more, more greed.
And then pride leads to the deadly sin of loss because it makes us feel like other people exist for the satisfaction of our desires.
Pride then leads to the deadly sin of sloth because it assumes that
Other people should do my work.
And then pride leads to the sin of gluttony because it makes us feel like every single appetite of ours should be fed.
And today we're gonna be looking at someone who at the very height of his power felt like he was unsinkable.
We're gonna be looking at King Nebuchadnezzar of ancient Babylon
his rise, his fall, and how he was restored.
And may the Holy Spirit serve as our guide and teacher as we look to God's word.
In Daniel 4.4, we read the king saying, this is Nebuchadnezzar.
I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at home in my palace, contented and prosperous.
But this sense of contentment and sense of prosperity will not last.
Nebuchadnezzar describes a dream that he has, a nightmare really.
And in the dream he sees this tree that is growing and becomes towering, reaching to the skies.
It has beautiful leaves and luscious abundant fruit.
wild animals find shelter under this tree and every living thing is fed by it.
And then an angel appears and commands that the tree be cut down.
And the tree is leveled and so only a stump remains.
And then the angel says, and let him lose his mind and think that he is a wild animal.
and let him be insane for seven periods of time or seven seasons so that everyone will know that only the most high God is the sovereign ruler of the world.
So this dream terrifies the king.
And so he calls in his trusted wise advisor, Daniel, in whom
he believes the spirit of the God's dwell.
Daniel ponders a dream.
God reveals its meaning to Daniel and Daniel becomes terrified for the King.
And the King says, Daniel, whatever's on your mind and heart, just spit it out.
And so Daniel says, if only this dream referred to your enemies,
But it does not.
It refers to you.
You, O King, are that tree.
You're about to be chopped down.
You're about to have a great fall.
You're about to lose your mind until you acknowledge that only the most high God is the sovereign ruler overall.
And so Daniel urges the King to humble himself before God now to repent, to avoid the fulfillment of this dream and this disastrous
passage that will unfold for him if he does not repent.
But the king is stubborn.
He's proud and he will not repent.
He will not humble himself before God.
And so the dream unfolds as he has it.
So what do we learn from King Nebuchadnezzar's experience?
What does it teach us?
Well, King Nebuchadnezzar is one of the most powerful people to have ever lived.
He was the king of every part of the world that he knew of.
He was the one who led the creation of the great hanging gardens of Babylon, considered one of the wonders of the ancient world, one of the seven wonders of that world.
He was the one under whose political and military genius and leadership
the kingdom of Babylonia expanded.
And of course he was a person of unimaginable wealth and power and fame.
And we would look at King Nebuchadnezzar and we would say, wow, he was really blessed.
He was really quote favored.
Our world tends to see people who are successful, wealthy, powerful, prestigious,
well-known as being quote, blessed and favored.
But God does not share this point of view.
In fact, scripture teaches that if a person has wealth and power, they're in a very dangerous place spiritually speaking.
Jesus famously taught that it is actually easier for a camel
to pass through the eye of a needle then for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.
Jesus was not teaching that if only the camel tries really hard, if the camel goes on a severe diet, no carbs, no processed sugars.
If only the camel does a lot of cardio, a lot of running and swimming and so forth.
If only,
The camel sucks in its breath.
It becomes as small as possible.
Then maybe the camel could fit through the eye of the needle.
Jesus is not teaching that.
He's teaching.
It's impossible for a camel.
No matter how hard the camel tries to pass through the eye of the needle, the only way a camel is gonna pass through that eye of the needle is if a miracle occurs.
And the camel gets really small or the eye of the needle gets really big.
And Jesus is teaching that the only way
a person who is rich can enter the kingdom of God is if God does a miracle in them.
Thomas Martin, the Trappist monk, wrote a memoir which became an unexpected bestseller.
He became famous as a result, much sought after, and a publisher thought, hey, this is a great idea.
pitched this proposition to him, said, Father Martin, or Father Lewis, I think is his monk name was, how about writing a book entitled The Secret of My Success?
Yeah, and Martin was inwardly laughing, but he was also dead against, he refused, and instead he wrote, if I had a message to my contemporaries, it is surely this,
Be anything you like, be mad men, drunks, but at all costs avoid one thing, success.
Morton understood that if you made it your main aim to be successful, you would probably forget to live and you would likely forget God.
And why is having wealth and power
and prestige, which whether we feel like we've got a lot of that or not, as Americans, as Canadians, as Japanese, we aspire to that consciously or unconsciously.
Isn't there something called the American dream?
There's also a Canadian dream as well.
Believe it or not.
It's not the point of this message.
Unless you want it to be.
What spiritual cancer grew in Nebuchadnezzar because he had these things in such abundance?
Pride.
And we of course know that, you know, there is such thing as a healthy pride.
This healthy pride was described by the author Issaac Denison who penned out of Africa.
She wrote that healthy pride is, quote, faith in the idea that God had when he made you.
So to have faith in the idea that God had when he made you, that you understand and appreciate that he made you for a good and noble and beautiful purpose, that's a healthy kind of pride.
But this is not the pride that Nebuchadnezzar is experiencing here.
What kind of pride is he experiencing?
Well, we see it.
as he's walking on the roof of his royal palace and he asked himself, verse 30, is this not the great Babylon I have built as the royal residence by my mighty power and for the glory of my majesty?
Nebuchadnezzar assumes that he is the great creator of Babylon.
So what's wrong with him taking all the credit for the glory of his kingdom?
Was
He not the one as we pointed out who led the creation of the great hanging gardens of Babylon.
Yes.
Was he not the one under whose political, a military genius, the kingdom of Babylon expanded?
But who gave Nebuchadnezzar his talents?
Who gave Nebuchadnezzar the opportunity to develop those talents?
who enabled Nebuchadnezzar to be actually born into a family where it would even be possible to become King.
King Nebuchadnezzar here, in the words of the late wise Pastor Tim Keller, is committing the sin of cosmic plagiarism.
He's taking credit
for things that God alone deserves credit for.
Be a little bit like me getting up here and saying, did you enjoy the worship today, the songs?
I wrote those songs when Brooke did or Christian did or someone else did, you know, that would be very uncool.
And so King Nebuchadnezzar and we if we take credit for things that belong only to God are committing the sin of cosmic plagiarism and we're breaking the first and greatest commandment to love God with all our heart, soul, mind and strength in our neighbor as ourself as we'll get to neighbor a little bit later.
But pride is a deadly sin because it causes us to sin against God.
by failing to love and honor God.
Pride also causes us to sin against ourselves as it robs us of our joy.
The former Senator Bill Bradley likes to tell a story about going into a restaurant one day, sits down, and the bus boy comes along with a small plate with a bun on it and a little pat of butter.
Senator Bradley looks at the bus boy
says, could I have another pad of butter please?
The busboy looks at him and says, one pad of butter per customer.
Well, Bradley wasn't laughing.
He said to the busboy, do you know who I am?
The busboy looks at him and says, no idea.
Bradley says, I am Bill Bradley.
I went to Princeton, I graduated at the top of my class, and then I played basketball for the New York Knicks.
Surely you've heard of the N-B-A.
And I am currently a United States Senator.
The busboy looks at him and says, wow, no kidding.
And then the busboy looks at Bradley and says, do you know who I am?
Senator Shakespeare said no.
I am the man in charge of the butter.
And I say one pad of butter per customer.
Bradley shares that story to poke some fun at himself.
But if we feel entitled to more butter or whatever butter represents for us,
If we feel entitled to more money, more recognition, more whatever, we will find that our joy is stolen.
So pride causes us to sin against God by failing to give God, God's honor and due.
Pride causes us to sin against ourselves by robbing us of our joy through a sense of entitlement.
And then pride causes us
to sin against others.
During the pandemic, a couple in our city of Vancouver, British Columbia, so this was early in the pandemic, flew to a rural community in the Yukon Territories.
Let me explain why and give some context.
The man, Rod Baker, was the president and CEO
of a Canadian casino and his yearly compensation was more than $10 million a year.
So he's making a lot of money.
So he and his wife, E. Catarina, fly to the Yukon, to this rural community to get access to a set of COVID vaccines from a mobile clinic.
They're not eligible for this.
you know, by rule, but they go to the Yukon and they pretend to be local motel workers.
The vaccines at this stage in the pandemic are meant for more vulnerable populations in Canada, including the indigenous who live far from any hospital, which was the case in this community.
And Rod and Ekaterina cut in line.
They jumped the queue and they got their COVID vaccines early.
big news in our country.
If we think that we are somehow better than someone else because they live in a rural community or because they are of a different race or ethnicity or because they struggle with an addiction or because of their gender orientation or their political views, whether that's conscious or unconscious sense that we're better than someone else,
we will tend to ignore them or cancel them or mistreat them and possibly even abuse them.
So pride is a deadly sin because it causes us to sin against God, ourselves, and others.
And so how do we deal with this unhealthy form of pride, which is a deadly sin?
One of the ways we can do this
and avoid committing the sin of cosmic plagiarism is by acknowledging and thanking God, worshiping God.
Jim Murphy is a friend of mine.
He's a former pro baseball player.
He's a mental skills coach.
And in his book, The Best Possible Life, Jim describes something that he calls the Michael Phelps principle.
Do you know how many gold medals, Olympic gold medals, Michael Phelps won?
Some of you are saying a lot.
He won 23.
Amazing, right?
Jim points out that that's actually more than most nations have won in their history.
Now Jim is a very committed Christian.
He doesn't live in Portland, but he likes to regularly listen to the messages from this community and the teachers here.
Jim says, consider Michael's astounding achievement, one of the greatest in the history of sport.
And then ask yourself the question, what percentage should God get as credit for his achievements?
And what percentage of the credit should we give to Michael himself?
If you just ask that question off the top of your head, I wonder what you would answer.
People, you might say, well, let's call it 50-50.
or at least that would be a very Canadian response.
But Jim says, if you think about the fact that for five years, Jim never missed a singular day of workouts, you might say, well, I think Michael deserves 75% of the credit or maybe even 95% of the credit.
But then Jim asks, well, if you ask questions like,
Where and how did Jim or did Michael receive his body capable of long, powerful strokes in the water?
And Jim asked, how many medals would he have won if he had been born not in the United States in relatively recent times, but in Afghanistan 400 years ago?
There's a definitive answer to that.
And the answer is precisely zero because the Olympic Games were not being held 400 years ago.
And Jim points out that if Michael had been born in Afghanistan 400 years ago, he would not have had access to a swimming pool to train.
He would have spent his days probably foraging for food and just daily necessities.
And so Jim asks, if you factor in,
Questions like, did he receive his body?
The fact that he was born into a country where he could swim, train, be coached, then you get a sense that the credit should overwhelmingly go to God.
But Michael trained really hard, so he deserves some credit too.
And so Jim says, I think the ratio should be 98% God, 2%.
Michael.
Miroslav Wolf, a Yale-based theologian in another conversation on meritocracy would put the number at 97 colon three, roughly the same.
Now, if you think about your life, you may not exactly relate to Michael Phelps, maybe one or two of you might.
Most of us, I can't relate to him.
But if you were to think about where you are at this stage in your life, how far you've come, your achievements thus far, how much of that can you attribute to God?
The more you recognize in the words of the writer, Anne Voskamp, that all is grace, all is grace, the more you will walk with
humility before God, and you'll be less susceptible to the deadly center pride.
And then we can also allow suffering to humble us and open us to God.
When King Nebuchadnezzar first heard Daniel's interpretation of the dream, he urged King Nebuchadnezzar to repent, to humble himself,
to avoid this disastrous scenario of losing his mind of being chopped down like a tree.
And the king refused to do so.
And so the king ends up losing his mind.
The dream is fulfilled.
His nails grow long like a wild birds.
He thinks he's a wild animal.
And he goes through this for seven periods of time or seven seasons until he finally
humbles himself before God and his mind and his sanity are restored.
And as the King eventually did, when we face suffering and adversity, and as Kurt mentioned at the conference, if we live long enough, don't feel left out if you've never experienced this in your life.
If you live long enough, you will.
We can allow the suffering and the adversity to
guide us into a place of humility before God and surrender and yielding.
A young man had just finished seminary and he became a first time pastor in the Washington DC area.
And his head pastor asked him if he would start to visit a patient in a Washington DC hospital who was dying of a very aggressive form of bone cancer.
So this young pastor starts visiting the man, quickly finds out that this patient does not consider himself a follower of Jesus and was seemingly not interested at all in spiritual things.
But as the young rookie pastor got to know the patient with this aggressive bone cancer, he realized that he had led an amazing life.
He found out that the man had been born in Spain
had been raised by a loving mother who taught him about Jesus.
But then the Franco regime killed his father.
And because the Franco regime was supported by the official Spanish church, the boy turned away from God and Christianity and became embittered about faith.
As a teenager,
He moved to the United States.
He did not speak any English at all, but studied really hard, worked hard, and eventually was admitted into medical school.
He would one day become a very successful, skillful physician, practicing at a prestigious hospital.
And then the cancer came.
And within a few short months, it would ravage the body he had kept so fit through daily swimming.
He told the pastor, the young pastor, I'm now depressed.
For all of my career, I have treated other people for their depression, but now that I'm in this dark valley, I have no answers for myself.
And then a few days after that conversation, while lying still in bed, his leg bone spontaneously fractured.
The bone cancer had progressed to that point.
And on the night before his scheduled operation, this man wrote a note to the young pastor, which included the words, I believe in God, the Father almighty, the maker of heaven and earth.
And in Jesus Christ, his only son, our Lord, words that he had learned from his mother at her knee as a boy.
And he concluded his note with these words, Jesus, I have not served or worshiped you.
I know the only way to come into your kingdom is through you.
The man never regained consciousness after the operation.
But we can know that because he had entrusted his life to Jesus,
that he would experience a new and utterly different kind of wholeness as he was welcomed into an existence to come by a father who loved him and received him with open arms.
And our suffering may not be as dramatic as this man's or as Nebuchadnezzar's, but if we face suffering and adversity,
We can allow these to move us to humble ourselves before God and to walk with humility before our Creator.
Some people do this proactively.
Richard Roar, the Franciscan priest says, I pray for one good humiliation every day.
I don't.
I pray that once.
It was immediately answered.
sort of the lights went out in my world, so to speak.
I just, no.
That's a prayer, unlike some other prayers that will probably be answered in quickly.
So pray it if you want to.
I'm not advising you to pray it based on experience.
But even if you don't pray that prayer, chances are you will experience
things that will humble you, that will cause suffering and pain, and you can use those things as a reason to turn toward your Creator in humility.
I don't pray that I would suffer a good humiliation every day, but I regularly experience humbling things, and I pray that as I am humbled that I would humble myself before God.
Also regularly pray something called the litany of humility, sometimes attributed to Thomas the campus.
And I will pray, from the desire to be esteemed, Jesus deliver me.
From the desire to be honored, Jesus deliver me.
Or from the fear of being overlooked, Jesus deliver me.
or from the fear of being forgotten, deliver me Jesus.
And similarly, sometimes I pray a prayer called the welcoming prayer crafted originally by Mary Morozovsky.
And it goes like this, this is a paraphrase of it, but because I consent to the work of the Holy Spirit and I let go of my desire for affection and esteem.
So we can,
Acknowledge and thank and worship God as a path to humility.
We can allow suffering and hardship to humble us before God.
And then finally, insofar as this message is concerned, when we consider the gifts God has given us and God's greatness, we can set our lives apart for God and in service for others.
When King Nebuchadnezzar had his dream,
his nightmare and Daniel interpreted it for him and said, you're about to experience a ghastly future.
You're going to lose your mind.
You're going to think you're a wild animal.
And so Daniel, as we've noted, urges the Kings, please, Nebuchadnezzar, repent, humble yourself before God so that you can avert this judgment so you can avoid this terrible suffering that's going to befall you.
And Daniel says,
And one of the ways you can show that you've really repented and humbled yourself before God is by verse 27, showing kindness to the oppressed.
He's saying, oh, King, demonstrate your repentance before God by using your vast powers, your wealth, your influence, your leverage to serve the oppressed, the vulnerable, those in need.
That will be a sign that you have humbled yourself before God.
And one of the signs that we have humbled ourselves before God that we recognize that every good and every perfect gift comes from his hand is that we have offered ourselves to God and then offered our gifts in the service of other people, especially those in need.
Pride causes us to turn inward, not just inward as we focus on our success, but causes us to be self-absorbed around our
failures around our shame.
But when we experience God's grace, we awaken to the greatness of God and we become aware of God's awesome majesty and we may be able to offer our lives with the Spirit's help to God and then in service for others.
And so one of the signs that we believe that all that we have is from God.
and that we are grateful to God is that we offer our talents, our gifts, our money, our resources, our time, our energy back to our Creator and to people and especially those who are in need, vulnerable, poor, oppressed.
Last Sunday, Tyler said that generosity
freezes from the captivity of greed and at the same time puts plate on the food of the poor.
And generosity can free us from the captivity of pride and enable us to become an instrument of God's beautiful purposes in the world for others.
To become an instrument of other people's wholeness and healing.
And we don't do this out of a sense of superiority, obviously, that would defeat the purpose.
Not out of a sense of guilty obligation, but out of a sense of joyful gratitude.
Why would we offer our lives to God in this way?
First of all, because God is worthy, period.
And also,
because of what God has done for us as we celebrated at Advent.
God who was far wealthier than even Nebuchadnezzar could possibly imagine.
God that first Christmas left in a manner of speaking the palace of heaven.
He was born into humble circumstances, became a human being.
He became poor for our sake so that we through his poverty might become rich in the only way that will ever really matter.
And then after having lived a perfect life as a human being, sinless life as a human being, God as a person in Jesus Christ would offer himself on the cross for us.
And he would lose not only his mind but his very life so that our mind and our life might be restored.
And on the cross he mysteriously absorbed our sins including our sins of pride and entitlement
so that we could be forgiven and free to these things, and then enter into the joyous freedom of a friendship with God.
And when we consider all that God has done for us, the only reasonable response in light of God's mercy is to offer our bodies, that is our whole selves to God, as a sacrifice, as an offering, for this is our true and proper worship.
Thanks for joining the Bridgetown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved, visit Bridgetown.church slash welcome.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgetown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at Bridgetown.church slash giving.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.